How proteins fold is a central question in biology, highly relevant to human health, as many diseases ranging from cancer to neurodegeneration are linked to protein misfolding. Several classes of molecular chaperones play central roles in the folding of newly translated polypeptides. While some chaperones, such as NAC or Hsp70 facilitate folding of a wide range of pro- teins, others, such as the ring-shaped chaperonin TRiC/CCT facilitate folding of a subset of proteins comprising 10% of the eukaryotic proteome. The proteins that require TRiC for folding, many of them essential for viability, are distinguished by their aggregation propensity and topological complexity. , TRiC functions in cooperation with upstream chaper- ones, including Hsp70 and prefoldin (PFD, also called GIMc). Prefoldin binds directly to TRiC through an electrostatic pivot, suggesting a direct mechanism of substrate transfer. How TRiC/CCT assists folding is intriguing because several eukaryotic proteins can only fold with the assistance of TRiC. These proteins cannot fold either spontaneously nor with any other chaperone, under any known condition. An explana- tion for this obligate requirement is lacking. An intriguing hypoth- esis is that the information present in their amino acid sequence does not sufﬁce to reach the native state. In this hypothesis, TRiC may contribute the chemical and topological environment necessary to guide their folding, suggesting a co-evolution be- tween TRiC and some eukaryotic proteins. TRiC is a 1 MDa chaperonin, consisting of two identical rings stacked back to back. Unlike bacterial or archaeal chap- eronins, each TRiC ring is assembled from eight different subunits, called CCT1–CCT8, in an evolutionarily conserved arrangement. Access to the central chamber of each ring is regulated in an ATP-dependent manner by a built-in lid, formed by ﬂexible loops protruding from each subunit. The lid is open in the unliganded apo-state of TRiC, allowing substrates to bind through subunit-speciﬁc contacts in the apical do- mains. ATP hydrolysis leads to lid closure, encapsulating the substrate within the central chamber, where folding occurs. The hetero-oligomeric nature of TRiC is likely key to its unique ability to fold obligate substrates. Subunit divergence likely con- tributes to the folding process in various ways. The speciﬁc sub- unit arrangement segregates substrate and ATP binding proper- ties within the ring and produces an asymmetric charge distribution within the closed chamber. Unfolded substrates such as actin, AML, or VHL bind open TRiC through subunit-spe- ciﬁc contacts with CCT apical domains. This could bias the initial topology of the TRiC-bound substrate to a conforma- tion that is productive for folding. Analysis of TRiC-mediated actin folding indicates that the gradient of ATP afﬁnities within the ring promotes stepwise release during chamber closure to facilitate folding. However, how folding occurs inside the closed TRiC folding chamber is not understood. Is the bound substrate released into the ATP-closed chaperonin chamber, as shown for bacterial chaperonin GroEL-ES? How do the prop- erties of the TRiC chamber affect the folding pathway of its substrates? To address these questions, we reconstituted and analyzed the prefoldin-TRiC-mediated folding pathway of the archetype TRiC obligate substrates - and -tubulin. Prefoldin maintains tubulin in a highly unstructured state and directly transfers sub- strate into the TRiC chamber. ATP addition then leads to lid closure and tubulin encapsulation and folding within the closed TRiC chamber. Biochemical and cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) structural analyses of the chaperone-mediated folding reaction reveal highly speciﬁc substrate contacts with the inner chamber of TRiC. These electrostatic and polar tubulin contacts with individual CCT subunits direct the tubulin folding trajectory by promoting domain-wise formation of four progressively folded intermediates culminating in the native state. - or -tubulin monomers are folded by a chaperone pathway consisting of prefoldin and TRiC/CCT and subse- quently steered into tubulin dimers by a complex network of poorly understood assembly factors. We reconstituted the prefoldin-TRiC-tubulin monomer folding pathway using puriﬁed human components ( Figures 1 A and S1 A–C). Folding reactions were performed starting from prefoldin-bound - and -tubulin complexes ( Figure S1 C) that were incubated with puriﬁed human TRiC in the presence and absence of ATP. Folding reactions were analyzed using native PAGE (N-PAGE) to assess formation of tubulin chaperone complexes during the folding reaction while limited-proteolysis assays followed by gel electrophoresis (LIP- PAGE) were used to examine the conformation of chaperone- bound tubulin ( Figures 1 B and 1C). N-PAGE revealed that TRiC addition to prefoldin: -tubulin or prefoldin: -tubulin complexes led to formation of a ternary complex with TRiC, reﬂected in a characteristic mobility shift ( Figure 1 B for -tubulin and S1D for -tubulin). Subsequent ATP addition led to production of folded protease-resistant tubulin monomer ( Figure 1 C; note GTP is added to stabilize folded tubulin). To further assess whether TRiC promotes ATP-dependent tubulin folding, we incubated these reactions with two factors known to bind to either - or -tubulin monomers, called TBCB and TBCA, respectively. N-PAGE revealed that, in the presence of ATP, TRiC yielded tubulin competent to form a characteristic complex with these monomer-binding factors ( Figure 1 B and S1 D). Susceptibility to low concentrations of non-speciﬁc protease proteinase K (PK) is a hallmark of unstructured polypep- tides, while folded domains tend to exhibit enhanced PK resis- tance. We used LIP-PAGE with PK to characterize the conformation of - and -tubulin folding intermediates along the prefoldin:TRiC chaperone pathway (LIP-PAGE, Figures 1 C and S1 E). Similar results were obtained for - and -tubulins, suggesting a shared mechanism of chaperone action for these proteins ( Figures S1 D and S1E). As expected, folded tubulin in / dimers is nearly fully PK resistant, except for some degrada- tion of ﬂexible C-terminal tails. In contrast, both - and -tubulin bound to prefoldin were highly PK sensitive, indicating the bound substrate adopts an unstructured protease-sensitive conforma- tion. Addition of TRiC and ensuing formation of a ternary prefol- din:tubulin:TRiC complex led to enhanced - and -tubulin pro- tection against PK, suggesting tubulin becomes compacted upon binding to TRiC. We reached similar conclusions using an antibody directed against the N-terminal domain of tubulin or one directed against the C terminus of tubulin ( Figures S1 G– S1I). Interestingly, probing with the N-terminal-directed antibody but not the C-terminal-directed antibody also detected smaller protected protease fragments, suggesting TRiC promoted formation of partially folded N-terminal domain structures. We next incubated the prefoldin:tubulin:TRiC complex with ATP, which promotes TRiC chamber closure and prefoldin dissociation. ATP incubation led to formation of full-length pro- tease-protected tubulin, with a similar level of protection as that observed for folded - and -tubulins in the native dimer. Since, in the presence of ATP, the TRiC lid alternates between open and closed states, we examined whether the increased protease protection was due to tubulin folding or to obstruction by the closed lid. First, we extended the time course of PK incubation to 16 min, which should give ample time to PK to access the sub- strate during the open states. Second, TRiC-tubulin was incubated with ATP to promote folding, followed by subsequent addition of apyrase for 30 or 90 min to hydrolyze all ATP, causing the TRiC lid to reopen. Under these conditions, tubulin re- mained fully protease protected, conﬁrming the ATP-induced protease protection arises from tubulin reaching the folded conformation ( Figures S1 G and S1I). To conﬁrm the TRiC dependence of -tubulin folding, we incu- bated prefoldin: -tubulin with archaeal chapero- nin, Mm-Cpn. Despite its structural and mechanistic similarity to TRiC, incubating the tubulin-Mm-Cpn complex with ATP/ GTP does not yield PK protection for tubulin but instead pro- duces a digestion pattern similar to that of prefoldin: -tubulin alone ( Figure 1 E). This experiment indicates tubulin cannot fold when encapsulated by a non-TRiC group II chaperonin. It also conﬁrmed tubulin protease protection does not derive from a lack of PK accessibility upon substrate enclosure in a folding chamber. These experiments suggest prefoldin and TRiC differ- entially affect the conformation of the substrate polypeptide dur- ing ATP-dependent tubulin folding ( Figure 1 D). Prefoldin main- tains tubulin in a protease-sensitive unstructured state, with no obvious protease-protected fragments observed. Upon prefol- din transfer to TRiC, tubulin becomes compacted, acquiring some protease resistance, including formation of N-terminal domain structures. Finally, ATP-driven encapsulation leads to a fully protease-resistant tubulin that can bind to tubulin monomer binding factors. Since locking the TRiC chamber into a closed conformation by the addition of ATP-AlFx also led to strong pro- tection from proteolysis, we conclude the substrate is fully encapsulated within the central chamber. We next examined folding when tubulin is directly bound to TRiC and the prefoldin-delivery step is bypassed ( Figure 1 E). The LIP-PAGE assay indicated tubulin adopts the same compact intermediate upon TRiC binding, regardless of whether tubulin is copuriﬁed with TRiC or delivered via prefoldin; further- more, ATP/GTP addition to TRiC-tubulin also yielded a fully pro- tease-protected conformation ( Figure 1 E). Thus, TRiC is primar- ily responsible for tubulin folding, while prefoldin functions to maintain tubulin in an unstructured state, likely to prevent forma- tion of off-pathway trapped intermediates. We set out to study each stage of the reconstituted prefoldin:TRiC-mediated tubulin folding pathway using a hybrid structural and biochemical approach ( Figure 1 D). Prefoldin is a jellyﬁsh-shaped complex with six different subunits forming a double sheet barrel from which coiled coils extend, forming ‘‘tentacles’’ ( Figure 2 A). The ﬂexible nature and relatively small size of prefoldin:tubulin hinders its structural characteriza- tion by cryo-EM. Accordingly, we mapped the prefoldin:tubulin contacts using crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), with similar results obtained for - and -tubulins ( Figure 2 A, 2B, and S2 A). Substrate crosslinks (XL) mapped primarily to the coiled-coil tentacles and the terminal disordered tails of prefol- din, indicating non-native tubulin binds inside the prefoldin ‘‘chamber’’ ( Figures 2 B and S2 B). Structural mapping of the prefoldin:tubulin XL contact information suggests substrate binds prefoldin through highly heterogeneous interactions within the chamber ( Figures 2 C and 2D). The N-terminal domain of tubulin made numerous contacts throughout the prefoldin inner chamber, with most XL mapping to contiguous prefoldin 1/5/6 coiled coils. In contrast, the tubulin core domain was crosslinked primarily to one speciﬁc region in prefoldin 6. The C-terminal domain of tubulin also crosslinked to a continuous patch on pre- foldin 3/5/6, while the M domain crosslinked to several points at the bottom of the prefoldin chamber. These analyses, together with the high protease sensitivity of prefoldin-bound tubulin, suggest tubulin populates a highly dynamic conformational ensemble, even though some regions of tubulin bind more stably to speciﬁc regions within the prefoldin chamber. Prefoldin is an ATP-independent chaperone, raising the ques- tion of how substrate binding and release are regulated. Surpris- ingly, while binding either - or -tubulin to prefoldin adds an additional molecular mass of 50 kDa to the 101 kDa prefoldin complex, the prefoldin-substrate complexes migrated faster on N-PAGE than prefoldin alone ( Figure 2 E). We hypothesized substrate binding to prefoldin induces a conformational compaction. Native mass spectrometry analyses support this idea ( Figures 2 F, 2G, S2 C, and S2D). Prefoldin alone produced a bimodal charge distribution for the single expected prefoldin mass (101 kDa) ( Figures S2 C and S2D). Because the charge states produced during gentle ionization are strongly dependent on the exposed surface area, these data indicate pure pre- foldin adopts two distinct structural states: one more compact and one more extended. Analysis of prefoldin: -tubulin com- plexes by native mass spectrometry also yielded a bimodal charge series consistent with the expected mass of the binary prefoldin: -tubulin complex (151 kDa) ( Figures 2 F and S2 E). Of note, the relative intensity, and therefore abundance, of the compact species was higher in prefoldin: -tubulin peaks compared to prefoldin peaks ( Figures 2 E–2G and S2 E). The conclusion that tubulin binding induces a shift to the more compact prefoldin conformation supports the N-PAGE analyses as well as our ﬁnding of extensive XL between tubulin and the tentacles of PFD2 and PFD6, located at opposite sides of the prefoldin chamber. A possible function for this compaction arises from cryo-EM structural analyses of the prefoldin-TRiC interaction, which found a ﬂexible contact point between the base of prefoldin and the apical domain of CCT4 in TRiC that al- lows prefoldin to pivot into the chamber. Prefoldin adopts a compact conformation in the less engaged TRiC contact, where the two substrate binding chambers are not aligned, but shifts to an extended conformation when the prefoldin-TRiC chambers become aligned, allowing for substrate transfer ( Figures 2 H and 2I, S2 F, and S2G). This suggests prefoldin initially binds TRiC in the compact, substrate-bound conformation, but then TRiC interactions promote the extended prefoldin state to facil- itate substrate release into the chaperonin chamber. To visualize the substrate handoff from prefoldin to TRiC, we added prefoldin: -tubulin to puriﬁed TRiC and studied the ternary complex by cryo-EM ( Figures 3 A and S3 A–S3D; Table S1 ). The prefoldin: -tubulin:TRiC complex showed the chamber of prefoldin fully aligned with that of TRiC through sub- unit speciﬁc contacts ( Figure 3 B). We observed a signiﬁcant extra density inside the inter-ring space formed at the TRiC equatorial region not observed in the absence of substrate ( Figures 3 B–3D). The prefoldin tentacles extend into the TRiC chamber. Strikingly, the PFD6 coiled coil made a clear connec- tion to the substrate-dependent density in the inter-ring space ( Figure 3 C). The prefoldin in this TRiC complex is in the open extended conformation, suggesting TRiC binding reduces its af- ﬁnity for the bound substrate. Indeed, no signiﬁcant substrate density is observed inside the prefoldin chamber, despite the substantial extra density observed between the two TRiC rings. The oval-shaped substrate-induced extra-density is asymmetri- cally located within the inter-ring TRiC chamber, close to sub- units CCT8, 6, and 3. Of note, we also observe clear connections between this density and the N-terminal tails of CCT5 and 7, which are normally not resolved in open TRiC structures ( Figure 3 D). To further assess the origin of the extra density, we prepared a TRiC: -tubulin complex generated without prefoldin and carried out cryo-EM analyses of both substrate-free apo-TRiC and TRiC: -tubulin. Only the -tubulin-containing TRiC has density in the central inter-ring region, while no notable density is observed in substrate-free apo-TRiC ( Figure 3 E). The substrate- dependent density is located within an inter-ring chamber created by the equatorial domains of CCTs protruding into the central axis, forming a 6 nm open cap covering a 9 5 nm globular inner space ( Figure 3 E). However, extensive focused 3D classiﬁcation on the substrate-dependent extra density failed to discern any folded domain or secondary structure. While the presence of substrate-dependent density indicates the forma- tion of a compact state, this structural uncertainty suggests het- erogeneity in either the folding state or the positioning of -tubulin within this region of the open TriC chamber. We used XL-MS to further characterize the contacts of -tubulin with prefoldin and TRiC within the ternary complex and in the binary TRiC: -tubulin complex ( Figures 3 E and S2 A; Table S2 ). TRiC addition to prefoldin: -tubulin led to a near com- plete loss of -tubulin’s XL to prefoldin and to the appearance of extensive XL to TRiC, consistent with substrate transfer between these chaperones ( Figure 3 F). The ternary complex only had one -tubulin XL to PFD1 and one -tubulin XL to the N terminus of PFD6 ( Figure 3 E). We also observed multiple PFD6 XL to the tails of CCT1 and CCT2 in the equatorial region of TRiC ( Figures S3 E and S3F). Together, these XL-MS observations support the structural data showing PFD6 inserting into the TRiC chamber placing the tip of the PFD6 tentacle proximal to the substrate- dependent density. Importantly, XL-MS also indicated extensive contacts between -tubulin and the N- and C-terminal tails ex- tending from the equatorial domains of CCT subunits into the chamber ( Figures 3 F and 3G). These XL-MS ﬁndings also agree with the cryo-EM maps showing the substrate localizes to the inter-ring chamber region in close proximity to the disordered N- and C-terminal CCT tails. XL between -tubulin and the CCT apical domains were observed in the TRiC -tubulin com- plex generated without prefoldin but not in the prefoldin: -tubu- lin:TRiC ternary sample. We did not observe notable sub- strate density at the similar contour level in the apical domain regions of TRiC. Perhaps the substrate interactions with apical domains are too dynamic to be clearly observed, or alternatively, apical contacts serve in the initial capture of substrate for subse- quent engagement with the CCT tails. The ternary complex with prefoldin may thus reﬂect the substrate state after transfer to the inter-ring chamber. While TRiC has been considered as a two-chamber folding system, our data suggest the existence of a third chamber that holds the substrate in open TRiC. Theoretically, the third inter- ring chamber provides enough space for 50 kDa protein, but it is most likely that both the substrate and the CCT tails contribute to the observed substrate-dependent density in our maps. Both TRiC and prefoldin contain long intrinsically disor- dered N- and C-terminal tails; the CCT tails projecting into this chamber comprise 35.5 kDa of protein mass (schematized in Figure 3 G). The observed substrate-dependent density within TRiC, together with the increased substrate protection from PK, both indicate the substrate becomes compacted upon TRiC binding, without leading to any stable domain formation. The unstructured CCT tails contacting -tubulin in this region of the open inter-ring TRiC chamber contain both polar and hy- drophobic character ( Figures 3 G and 3H). We speculate that these disordered tails function as a tethered solvent that main- tains the unfolded polypeptide in a conformationally dynamic coacervate state, thus preventing the formation of trapped inter- mediates. This may stabilize -tubulin folding intermediates in a folding-competent state by interactions with CCT tails in the open chaperonin conformation ( Figures 3 H and 3I). To examine the next step of the -tubulin folding cycle ( Fig- ure 4 A), we incubated the TRiC: -tubulin complex with ATP- AlFx to stabilize the closed conformation and examined -tubulin folding in the chamber by cryo-EM. Following incubation with ATP-AlFx, we observed open and closed TRiC states containing -tubulin-dependent density ( Figure 4 A). As expected, the 3.8 A open TRiC state contains the -tubulin-dependent density in the inter-ring space ( Figures 4 , S4 A, and S4B; Table S1 ). In contrast, the closed TRiC conformation contains the substrate density in the apical region within one of the chambers ( Figure 4 A, right). The repositioned -tubulin in the 2.8 A resolution closed TRiC density map had well-deﬁned secondary structural element fea- tures ( Figure 4 A). Additionally, most of the CCT N- and C-termi- nal tails could be traced in the closed conformation but not in the open conformation. In the initial overall map of closed TRiC: -tubulin, we visual- ized partially folded -tubulin with varying resolution, suggesting compositional and conformational heterogeneity. 3D classiﬁca- tion focusing on the -tubulin density revealed four distinct con- formations of -tubulin with structurally resolvable domains. The TRiC: -tubulin conformations were reconstructed to resolutions ranging from 2.9 A to 3.6 A ( Figures 4 B and S4 C-S4E) allowing us to build models of each TRiC-bound state ( Figure 4 C). In all four maps, the resolvable densities corresponded to native tubulin domains with well-resolved helices and strands ( Figures 4 B and 4C; Video S1 ). The four -tubulin structures are aligned along an axis of increased domain formation, suggesting -tubulin is progressively folded in the TRiC chamber. We also observed clear density for the negatively charged C-terminal -tubulin E-hook tail ( Figures 4 D and S5 A), which is ﬂexible in native tubulin. To assess the resolvability of our densities, we used a per-residue Q-score proﬁle in a sliding window of 10 residues ( Figure S4 F). In agreement with their estimated reso- lution, we obtained consistently high Q-scores for the folded re- gions demonstrating the high resolvability of structural elements. In contrast, the poorly resolved segments have low Q-scores, suggestive of unfolded or conformationally dynamic regions. These conformations, designated states I–IV, reveal progres- sively folded -tubulin inside closed TRiC, with state IV corre- sponding to fully folded -tubulin ( Video S1 ). The well-resolved residues in states I–IV map to speciﬁc do- mains formed by discontinuous sequences suggestive of domain-wise folding of -tubulin ( Figures 4 D and 4E). The least-folded intermediate, state I, contains the folded N-terminal -tubulin domain (residues 1–170) ( Figure 4 E) with the exposed surface contacting the inner wall of CCT6-CCT8 ( Figure 4 C) and the C-terminal -tubulin E-hook (residue 438–444) bound to a pocket between CCT1 and CCT4 ( Figure S5 A). State II contains the resolved regions of state I as well as resolvable discontinuous sequence elements corresponding to the folded C-terminal domain (C domain) of -tubulin, spanning residues 171–203 and 263–267 and C-terminal helices 372–426 ( Figures 4 D and 4E). The folded C-terminal domain also binds the inner wall of TRiC, contacting residues of subunits CCT1 and CCT3 ( Figure 4 C). State III also contained the folded N- and C-terminal domains observed in state II as well as the discontinuous resolvable sequence elements corresponding to the folded helical core domain, spanning residues 204–262, 268–272, and 366–371 ( Figures 4 D and 4E). Finally, state IV re- sembles state III but also contains the folded middle M domain, composed of residues 273–365. Folding of this last M domain completes formation of a fully native -tubulin monomer ( Figures 4 D and 4E). Though the TRiC-bound -tubulin states exhibit C- backbone variation in certain loop regions, the folded secondary structural elements in all four states are almost iden- tical to the structure of native -tubulin (PDB: 6I2I) ( Figure S4 G). The C-terminal E-hook tail of -tubulin was clearly traceable in all four states nestled in a pocket formed by CCT1 and CCT4 ( Fig- ure S5 A). These four structural states of -tubulin within the chamber of TRiC suggest a sequential folding pathway where discontinuous sequence elements fold into speciﬁc native-like domains in close association with the inner chaperonin chamber, culminating in the native state ( Figure 4 E). Upon ATP-driven encapsulation, the inner TRiC wall engages in domain-speciﬁc contacts with all four -tubulin intermediates. The extent of electrostatic interactions with the inner TRiC cham- ber increases from the less-folded to more-folded -tubulin in- termediates ( Figure 5 B; Video S2 ). This suggests a different mechanism to bacterial chaperonin GroEL-ES, which promotes substrate folding by releasing encapsulated polypeptides into their central hydrophilic chamber, often termed an ‘‘Anﬁnsen cage.’’ We next examined in detail the interactions between -tubulin and the TRiC chamber in each state. In all four -tubulin interme- diates, negatively charged residues exposed by folded N-termi- nal domain contacts speciﬁc positively charged residues in CCT6 and CCT8, while the negatively charged, normally unstruc- tured, C-terminal E-hook tail of -tubulin contacts a positively charged pocket at the interface of CCT1 and CCT4 ( Figures 5 B and S5 A; Movie S2). The folded C-terminal -tubulin domain in states II–IV also engages in electrostatic contacts with positively charged residues in CCT1 and CCT3. These electrostatic contacts between the folded N- and C-terminal domains and TRiC persist even once -tubulin reaches the fully folded state ( Figure 5 A). Previous analysis recognized that the TRiC inner chamber contains an asymmetric charge distribution, with a strong posi- tively charged inner surface contributed by subunits CCT1/3/6/ 8 and a strong negatively charged inner surface contributed by CCT2/4/5/7 ( Figure 5 C). Of note, these charged surface patches are only formed upon lid closure following ATP hydroly- sis ( Figure 5 C). The -tubulin electrostatic interactions with the positively charged surface of TRiC segregate -tubulin to one side of the TRiC chamber via contacts present in all folding inter- mediates, while the polypeptide regions folded only in states III and IV extend into the chamber cavity ( Figures 4 B and S5 B), sug- gesting additional TRiC regions contribute to -tubulin folding. We next examined the speciﬁc contacts between the CCT subunits and each -tubulin folding intermediate ( Figures 5 D– 5I). In the folded -tubulin N domain (blue in Figures 5 D and 5E), residues on the N terminus, H2, H3, H4, and loops H1-S2, H3-S4, and H4-S5 form salt bridges and hydrogen bonds with residues on CCT6 and CCT8 ( Figures 5 D and 5E). Within the folded C domain (green in Figures 5 F and 5G), H11 and H12 are anchored to CCT1 and CCT3 by additional salt bridges and hydrogen bonds ( Figure 4 E). Our analysis also revealed speciﬁc contacts between -tubulin and tails of CCT6 and CCT2, in addi- tion to the previously highlighted E-hook tail of -tubulin ( Figures 5 H and S5 B). Remarkably, both the E-hook and the CCT tails are normally disordered, indicating that formation of the TRiC: -tubulin complex promotes stabilization of these ﬂexible regions. The negatively charged E-hook of -tubulin is nestled into a positively charged pocket at the interface of CCT1 and CCT4 ( Figures 5 H and S5 A). The CCT6 C-terminal tail is proximal to the -tubulin T5 loop in the C domain, which is part of the GTP binding pocket ( Figure 5 Hi). Since the T5 loop forms a possible hydrogen bond to GTP, it is possible that the CCT6 tail facilitates formation of the tubulin GTP binding pocket. Indeed, we observe nucleotide density in state III of -tubulin ( Figure 5 H). The regions corresponding to the core and M domains extend into the center of the TRiC chamber without any appreciable in- teractions with the inner wall. Closer examination reveals that TRiC contacts the core and M domains via the C-terminal tail of CCT2 in all the observed -tubulin folding states ( Figures 5 Hiii and S5 B). In states I and II, the C terminus of CCT2 interacts with unfolded core/M domain density, while in states III and IV, the CCT2 tail engages the N and M loops in the taxol binding site as the core and M domains form sequen- tially during folding ( Figure S5 B). This suggests the C-terminal tail of CCT2 interacts with and assists the folding of the core and M domains of -tubulin within the lumen of the chamber. Interest- ingly, although the ﬂexible CCT2 C tail is poorly resolved in substrate-free closed TRiC chamber, we observe at a lower threshold an association between the vicinal C-terminal tails of CCT1 and CCT2, which extend together into the chamber ( Fig- ure S5 E). Consistent with this observation, the C-terminal tail of CCT1 is negatively charged and that of CCT2 is positively charged and possesses several prolines that may rigidify this ﬂexible region. It is interesting to speculate that the C termini of CCT1-CCT2 jointly act as a fulcrum that, upon lid closure, fa- cilitates the repositioning of -tubulin to the vicinity of the CCT1- CCT3-CCT6-CCT8 hemisphere. These structures indicate that all the -tubulin folding interme- diates interact with closed TRiC through a combination of more rigid and complementary electrostatic interactions with the chamber wall and ﬂexible interactions with the CCT tails ( Fig- ure 5 I). Importantly, the negatively charged surface character of the N- and C-terminal domains is conserved across -, - and -tubulins ( Figure S5 F), suggesting a similar mode of TRiC-facilitated folding. Emphasizing the importance of these contacts for tubulin folding, the residues within the TRiC cham- ber making both electrostatic inner chamber contacts and tail contacts with -tubulin are highly conserved ( Figure S5 G). It thus appears that TRiC does not release the -tubulin polypep- tide into the closed chamber for folding. Instead, the TRiC cham- ber binds -tubulin throughout the folding process. The TRiC contacts directly restrain and orient the N domain and C-terminal tail of -tubulin to one hemisphere in the chamber, thus limiting the folding polypeptide’s degree of freedom and preventing its free rotation in the chamber. Our four cryo-EM structures of progressively folded -tubulin ( Figure 5 ) demonstrate the involvement of different CCT subunits at different folding intermediates via speciﬁc chemical interac- tions and the unexpected roles of the intrinsically disordered CCT tails guiding the unstructured domains of -tubulin toward the fully folded structure ( Figure 6 A). A pathway invoking early folding of the N-terminal -tubulin domain, which is well resolved in all four TRiC-bound folding intermediates, resonates with the PK-sensitivity assays of the folding reaction, which indicate early protection of an N-terminal domain but rapid digestion of the C terminus until completion of full-length -tubulin folding ( Figures S1 G–S1I). Our results suggest how TRiC-directed -tubulin folding cir- cumvents the challenges posed by its complex topology and aggregation-prone sheets. The progressively folded intermedi- ates observed in the chamber form domains that are discontin- uous in sequence but orchestrate the continuous formation of a hydrophobic sheet running the length of the -tubulin struc- ture ( Figure 6 Bi; Movie S3). Anchoring the surface of the folded N and C domains to the TRiC chamber wall not only establishes the native topology but also positions the growing folding inter- mediates so that their hydrophobic core extends toward the inte- rior of the chamber ( Figure 6 Bii). Comparing states I through IV, each increasingly folded intermediate adds another strand layer to the exposed hydrophobic core, likely priming it for the next folding step. Importantly, each intermediate also incorpo- rates the helices above and below the growing sheet, thus pro- tecting its edges and reducing the potential for off-pathway inter- actions. In state I, the folded N domain exposes the hydrophobic strands S4 and S5. Completion of the Rossman fold in state II al- lows helices H5, H11, and H12 to cover the newly incorporated strands S6 and S7. Formation of the core domain in state III re- quires a change in direction between strands S7 and S10, medi- ated by helix H7. The CCT2 tail may participate in this step, as it interacts with this region of the core domain. The last folding step to reach native -tubulin involved completion of the sheet by addition of sheets S8–S10 and positioning of helices H7, H9, and H10 to cover the hydrophobic core of tubulin. We propose that these TRiC interactions shape the tubulin folding landscape to establish the native topology and preclude the formation of trap- ped folding intermediates, thereby reducing the frustration of the folding landscape. While eukaryotic tubulin folding exhibits an obligate requirement for TRiC, its prokaryotic homolog FtsZ can spontaneously fold without chaperones. Both proteins share a similar overall to- pology with other superfamily members in prokaryotes and archaea, including the overall domain organization and the extended core sheet ( Figures 6 C, S6 A, and S6B). How- ever, eukaryotic tubulins are distinguished by additional features integral to their unique function and regulation, including remod- eling of GTP afﬁnity and hydrolysis kinetics, the ability to engage in microtubule lateral contacts, and binding microtubule-associ- ated proteins (MAPs). These tubulin functions are accom- panied by insertions in the H1-S2 loop and two negatively charged helices, H11 and H12; by the presence of the E-hook tail; by the remodeling of the residues contacting GTP; and by extensive changes to the C domain leading to an increase in hy- drophobic interdomain interfaces (highlighted in Figure 6 C for 6I2I vs 1FSZ, S6 C). Eukaryotic tubulins are also distin- guished by the strongly negative surface charge on the folded N and C domains as well as a negatively charged C-terminal E-hook tail. We hypothesize these features of eukaryotic tubulins hinder their ability to fold spontaneously or with simpler chap- erone systems. Remarkably, the tubulin-speciﬁc insertions correspond to the sites of TRiC binding during folding in the closed chamber, suggesting their incorporation into ancestral tubulin was accompanied by a need for specialized folding assistance ( Figure 6 D). This hypothesis is supported by close examination of how TRiC mediates formation of the unique N-C domain interface in -tubulin ( Figures 6 E and S6 D). The T3 loop, which participates in the folded -tubulin N-C interdomain interface, shifts between two alternative conformations in the TRiC-bound -tubulin folding intermediates, with 13 A C- variation ( Figures S4 G and S5 C; Video S4 ). Our maps’ good Q-score resolve the bulky side chains in the T3 loop, such as H105 and Y106, allowing us to trace the density of T3 in the folding intermediates ( Fig- ure S6 D). The H1-S2 loop forms charged and hydrogen-bonded interactions with the TRiC chamber, suggesting a stabilizing ef- fect on the inserted -tubulin loops by the TRiC chamber (Figures 4 E and 6 D). In state I, the T3 loop, resolved at residues 100–109, adopts an extended conformation directed by con- tacts with E202 of CCT3 and D86 of CCT6 ( Figure S5 C). In state II, a decrease in resolvability of residues 96–106 in T3 ( Fig- ure S5 C) suggests the loop changes conformation upon folding of the C domain. In states III and IV, the T3 loop becomes well resolved due to its stabilization by interaction with the folded C domain, adopting the native -tubulin conformation (PDB: 6I2I) ( Figures S4 G and S5 C). Accordingly, N99 of T3 serves in GTP -phosphate sensing, while hydrophobic T3 residues including W101 are embedded in the hydrophobic interface be- tween the N and C domains ( Figure 6 C). Folding of the core helix domain completes the GTP binding pocket by contributing the H6-H7, consistent with the nucleotide density in the GTP binding pocket observed in states III and IV ( Figures 5 D, 6 E, and S5 C). Thus, TRiC contacts keep the T3 loop in an extended conforma- tion when the C domain is not folded, and these contacts are released to allow the native conformation at the interdomain interface upon C domain folding. Why some proteins have an obligate requirement for TRiC assistance has long been enigmatic. We combined XL-MS and cryo-EM to elucidate the pathway delivering unstructured -tubulin from PFD to the TRiC chamber where it folds through speciﬁc contacts between the substrate and the CCT subunits ( Figure 7 A). We determined near-atomic-resolution structures of multiple stable folding intermediates of -tubulin engaged in speciﬁc interactions with various CCT subunits including the intrinsically disordered termini. Our data suggest that these interactions guide tubulin to the native state through stepwise formation of partially folded intermediates ( Figure 7 B). Throughout this pathway, the substrate is not released into the central TRiC chamber, unlike what is observed with GroEL-ES, but instead remains anchored through speciﬁc con- tacts with the CCT wall and the C tails. These ﬁndings establish that, for tubulin, and perhaps other TRiC substrates, the folding pathway is guided by explicit interactions with the inner TRiC chamber. Of note, a recent study published during the review process. (NSMB, doi: 10.1038/s41594-022-00755-1 ) reports that TRiC immunoprecipitated from a cell lysate contains a partially folded tubulin molecule within the closed chamber in the same location we observed for our averaged initial TRiC-ATP-tubulin folding in- termediate in Figure 4 A. It is tempting to speculate that the tubulin contained within TRiC isolated from cells became asso- ciated during the process of biogenesis and thus represents the ensemble states of biologically meaningful folding intermedi- ates. While further experiments should probe how tubulin folds in vivo following translation, these data suggest our reconstituted folding reaction recapitulates the intermediates populated dur- ing biological folding of tubulin. Prefoldin-bound -tubulin is delivered to the open TRiC cham- ber, where interactions with the disordered CCT tails generates a compact entity without discernible folded elements. We speculate the disordered tails conﬁned within the TRiC chamber act as a tethered solvent to maintain the ﬂuidity of the substrate promoting a dynamic yet compacted state. The liquid-like nature of such a coacervate may prevent the forma- tion of non-productive or trapped intermediates, priming the substrate for productive folding upon chamber closure ( Fig- ure 7 A). Upon ATP-dependent chamber closure, the substrate repositions from the equatorial chamber into one of the ring-en- closed folding chambers ( Figure 7 B). The ATP-closed TRiC chamber directs the stepwise formation of -tubulin folding in- termediates that remain bound to speciﬁc regions in the cham- ber through electrostatic and H-bond interactions between -tubulin and the TRiC chamber. These contacts establish the necessary native topology for -tubulin and help orches- trate a hydrophobic collapse to then drive sequential folding of the -tubulin domains. One feature of the discontinuous formation of -tubulin domains in this folding pathway is the unidirectional assembly of the sheet spanning the entire hy- drophobic core in folded -tubulin. These TRiC contacts appear to direct -tubulin folding through sequential domain formation without releasing the substrate into the chamber. This contrasts to the mechanism of chaperonin GroEL-ES, which releases polypeptides into an inner chamber that pro- vides a unique conﬁned environment for folding. The fact that contacts with the closed TRiC chamber guide multiple steps in -tubulin folding raises doubts on the universality of Anﬁnsen’s principle. The concept of TRiC directing the folding pathway is illus- trated by the notable structural change in the T3 loop of -tubulin between states I and II. TRiC keeps the T3-loop in an extended conformation through contacts with the inner wall until the C-terminal domain folds through association with the TRiC wall, then the T3 loop is released from the chamber wall to become nestled at the N-C domain interface. The T3 loop acts as a folding switch to control sequential folding of the GTP binding pocket after completion of the N-C domain interface ( Figure 6 E). Thus, TRiC binding to the T3 loop ensures the proper folding of the C domain, establishing the overall fold topology of -tubulin and allowing the hydrophobic core of the M and core domains to fold. Perhaps GTP binding to the incip- ient nucleotide pocket drives these subsequent steps, as observed for bacterial tubulin FtsZ ( Figure 6 C), where GTP bind- ing is a limiting step during spontaneous refolding. The TRiC: -tubulin contacts directly orchestrate the progression of events needed to form the GTP binding pocket by sequential positioning of the nucleotide sensing T3 loop to form the N-C domain interface, which are not conserved in FtsZ ( Fig- ures 6 C–6E). Consistent with this, tubulin mutations in the N-C domain interface affect -tubulin folding and release from TRiC ( Figure S6 E). While TRiC appears to direct the folding landscape through formation of speciﬁc intermediates ( Fig- ure 7 B), the tubulin-CCT contacts may also disfavor formation of kinetically trapped states ( Figure 7 C). It is intriguing to speculate why and how this complex TRiC- tubulin requirement evolved from simpler ancestral proteins like FtsZ, which can refold without assistance. Compared with FtsZ, tubulin contains a series of structural changes that serve to enable functional interactions at the lateral interface of protoﬁlaments and binding of microtubule-associated pro- teins (MAPs) and kinesin. While these additional ele- ments support the novel properties of eukaryotic tubulin, they appear to impair spontaneous folding, perhaps leading to off-pathway or kinetically trapped intermediates ( Figure 7 C). Strikingly, the major sites of -tubulin interaction with the TRiC-chamber are in these eukaryote-speciﬁc regions. We pro- pose these eukaryotic-speciﬁc changes in tubulin evolved to exploit the hetero-oligomeric and asymmetric nature of TRiC to circumvent the inherent challenges they pose to the folding pathway. The ﬁnding that tubulin folding is closely directed by TRiC chamber interactions opens new perspectives to understand the role of TRiC in eukaryotic protein evolution. The striking expansion of TRiC subunits directs the subunit-speciﬁc diversi- ﬁcation of substrate binding sites, ATP afﬁnity, and chamber properties, all of which contribute to its unique ability to fold some eukaryotic proteins. In turn, these may underlie their obli- gate requirement for TRiC to fold. Given that TRiC facilitates folding of 10% of the proteome, it is likely that some proteins employ TRiC like an Anﬁnsen cage, similar to GroEL-ES, to pre- vent aggregation and smooth the folding landscape. Indeed, the now more limited space present in the chamber upon ATP- induced lid closure may restrain the possible orientations or con- formations of the encapsulated polypeptide, signiﬁcantly reducing the structural ensembles available to the substrate within the chamber of closed TRiC. Other proteins may addition- ally exploit other evolved features of the TRiC hetero-oligomer for which the diverse apical domain sequence and structure can provide substrate interaction speciﬁcity to promote a spe- ciﬁc polypeptide binding topology. Also, some sub- strates may interact distinctly with speciﬁc regions in the cham- ber. Our ﬁnding that the eukaryote-speciﬁc tubulin insertions evolved surface-exposed motifs that bind speciﬁc regions in the TRiC chamber to shape the folding pathway provides an intriguing clue as to how some eukaryotic proteins evolved to exploit the unique properties of TRiC to acquire new functional- ities that would otherwise impede their correct folding. A TRiC-directed -tubulin folding pathway that progresses from less folded to more folded states is here derived from snapshot images at single-equilibrium condition. Time-resolved kinetic an- alyses of tubulin folding, such as time-resolved H-D exchange and spectroscopic approaches are needed to validate and extend this pathway. The observation that the CCT intrinsically disordered tails promote TRiC-mediated folding resonates with ﬁndings for other chaperones that also use disordered domains for function. Extending the idea that regions of intrinsic dis- order promote folding will open new perspectives on what con- stitutes a chaperone and revise the classic notion that chaperones only function through domains that recognize non- native proteins through hydrophobic surfaces. Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: KEY RESOURCES TABLE RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Materials availability Data and code availability EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS METHOD DETAILS Cloning Protein expression and puriﬁcation Native and SDS PAGE analysis Tubulin folding assays Proteinase K assays Crosslinking-mass spectrometry Native Mass spectrometry Cryo-EM specimen preparation and data collection Data processing and 3D reﬁnement Model building PISA analysis Logo plot generation Sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree building QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact, Judith Frydman ( jfrydman@stanford.edu ). Reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact upon request without restriction. The 3D cryoEM density maps have been deposited in the Electron Microscopy DataBank under the accession number EMD: EMD- 32822, 32823, 26089, 26120, 26123, 26131. Coordinates have been deposited in the PDB under the accession number PDB: 7WU7, 7TRG, 7TTN, 7TTT, 7TUB. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identiﬁer PXD030590. This paper does not report the original code. Any additional in- formation required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request. Initial bacmid DNA was generated in DH10Bac cells (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) according to manufacturer protocols. Generation of baculovirus was performed in SF9 cells (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), SF9 cells were maintained in SF900 iii SFM at 27C and baculovirus was generated at a cell concentration of 1X10 6 cells/ml. Protein expression was performed in High Five cells (Thermo Fisher Sci- entiﬁc) adapted to and maintained in ESF 921 media (Expression Systems) at 27C. Viral infections for protein expression were per- formed at a cell concentration of 2X10 6 cells/ml. Human -tubulin (TBB5) and -tubulin (TUBA1B) were cloned into the pFB-Dual vector using conventional methods. Brieﬂy, Tubulin was ampliﬁed using 5 primer TTT TAG CGG CCG CCA AAA CAT GAG GGA AAT CGT GCA CAT CC and 3 primer ATT TTT CTA GAT TAT CAG GCC TCC TCT TCG GCC TCC, and Tubulin was ampliﬁed using 5 primer TTT TAG CGG CCG CCA AAA CAT GCG TGA GTG CAT CTC CAT CC and 3 primer ATT TTT CTA GAT TAT CAG TAT TCC TCT CCT TCT TCC TCA CC from the plasmids pTS3067 and pTS4119 respectively. Ampliﬁed products and pFB-Dual vector were combined after digestion with NotI and XbaI, and sequence of isolated clones was veriﬁed. TBCA was cloned into pST39 and TBCB was cloned into pFB-Dual vectors using conventional methods. Brieﬂy, TBCA was ampliﬁed using 5 primer AGT TTC TAG ATT TGT TTA ACT TTA AGA AGG AGA TAT ACA TAT GGC CGA TCC TCG CGT GAG and 3 primer AAT TAG GAT CCT CAT TAG TGA TGG TGA TGA TGG TGG GCT TCT AAC TTC ACT G and cloned into pST39 using XbaI and BamHI. TBCB was ﬁrst ampliﬁed using 5 primer AGT TTC TAG ATT TGT TTA ACT TTA AGA AGG AGA TAT ACA TAT GGA GGT GAC GGG GGT GTC and 3 primer (with 6XHis) AAT TAG GAT CCT CAT TAG TGA TGG TGA TGA TGG TGA CTG CCT ATC TCG TCC AAC CCG TAG TCC and cloned into pST39 with XbaI and BamHI. To move TBCB into the pFB-Dual vector for insect cell expression TBCB was PCR ampliﬁed out of pST39 using 5 TAATTCTCGAGCTATAAATATGGAGGTGACGGGGGTGTCGAND-3 TAA TTG GTA CCT CAT TAG TGA TGG TGA TGA TGG TGA CTG CC and inserted into pFB-Dual using XhoI and KpnI. High Five insect cells (1 L) were co-infected with rBVs encoding his-tagged TRiC with CCT1 tagged with GFP. Cells were incubated at 27 C for 72 h, pelleted by centrifugation at 500 x g for 10 min, and resuspended in TRiC lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 5 mM PMSF) supplemented with benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich-Aldrich, E1014) (1,000 units) and a protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche]). Cells were lysed using dounce homogenization and debris was cleared by ultracentrifugation at 50,000 x g at 4 C for 40 min. Cleared supernatant was passed over nickel resin and washed with column wash buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol) with an additional 250 mM NaCl, column wash buffer +1 mM ATP, column wash buffer + an additional 500 mM NaCl, and ﬁnally column wash buffer alone. Nickel-bound protein was eluted with elution buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl 400 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol). Protein-containing fractions were pooled and passed over a heparin column equilibrated with MQA buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl , 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol). Protein was eluted with a linear gradient of 20%–100% MQB buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1 M NaCl, 5 mM MgCl , 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol). TRiC-containing fractions were pooled and diluted with MQ buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl , 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol) to remove excess NaCl. Pooled TRiC was loaded onto a Mono Q ion exchange col- umn and eluted with a 200 mL linear gradient of 0%–100% MQB. TRiC containing fractions were pooled, concentrated with a 100 kDa MWCO Centricon device, and passed over a Superose 6 size exclusion column equilibrated with MQA. TRiC containing fractions were pooled, concentrated, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for long-term storage. High Five insect cells (1 L) were co-infected with rBVs encoding his-tagged TRiC and the Human -tubulin protein. Cells were incu- bated at 27 C for 72 h, pelleted by centrifugation at 500 x g for 10 min, and resuspended in TRiC lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 5 mM PMSF) supplemented with benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich-Aldrich, E1014) (1,000 units) and a protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche]). Cells were lysed using dounce homogenization and debris was cleared by ultracen- trifugation at 50,000 x g at 4 C for 40 min. Cleared supernatant was passed over nickel resin and washed with column wash buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol). Nickel-bound protein was eluted with column wash buffer containing 400 mM imidazole. Protein-containing fractions were pooled and passed over a heparin column equilibrated with MQA buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl , 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol). Protein was eluted with a linear gradient of 20%–100% MQB buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1 M NaCl, 5 mM MgCl , 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol). TRiC- containing fractions were pooled and diluted with MQ buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl , 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol) to remove excess NaCl. Pooled TRiC was loaded onto a Mono Q ion exchange column and eluted with a 200 mL linear gradient of 0%–100% MQB. Fractions were assayed for the presence of -tubulin and TRiC, pooled, concentrated with a 100 kDa MWCO Cen- tricon device, and passed over a Superose 6 size exclusion column equilibrated with MQA. TRiC containing fractions were pooled, concentrated, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for long-term storage. The integrity of TRiC and -tubulin occupancy were conﬁrmed by SDS-PAGE, native-PAGE, Coomassie staining, and immunoblotting with a rabbit CCT5-speciﬁc antibody (Abcam ab129016) and a mouse -tubulin speciﬁc monoclonal antibody (Proteintech 66240-1-Ig). All Human Prefoldin subunits were co-expressed using baculovirus in High Five insect cells. The Prefoldin complex was isolated by afﬁnity (Nickel-NTA), anion exchange (Mono Q 10/100), and gel ﬁltration (Superdex 200) chromatography. At each step, fractions containing Prefoldin were identiﬁed by SDS-PAGE. Final protein was concentrated to 100 M using an Amicon Ultra 30 kDa MWCO, and 50% glycerol was added to yield a ﬁnal concentration of 10%. Protein was aliquoted, snap-frozen, and stored at 80 C. Human Prefoldin was co-expressed with human -tubulin or -tubulin in High Five insect cells and puriﬁed as described above without the anion exchange step. All subunits were co-expressed using baculovirus in High Five insect cells. The Prefoldin complex was isolated by afﬁnity (NickelNTA) and gel ﬁltration (Superdex 200) chromatography. At each step, fractions containing Prefoldin and Tubulin were identiﬁed by SDS-PAGE. Final protein was concentrated to 20 M using an Amicon Ultra 30 kDa MWCO, and 50% glycerol was added to yield a ﬁnal concentration of 10%. Protein was aliquoted, snap-frozen, and stored at 80 C. TBCA was expressed in 4 L of BL21 Rosetta2 pLysS cells O/N at 16 C. Cells were lysed in 50 mL of column buffer (300 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) with benzonase, fresh PMSF, 10 mM imidazole and Complete protease inhibtiors, EDTA free. Cells were lysed 2X using an emulsiﬂex (Avestin), and lysate was cleared at 20,000 x g for 30 min. Protein was afﬁnity puriﬁed in a 10 mL Ni column equilibrated with column buffer and eluted with column buffer +400 mM imidazole after a wash of 300 mL column buffer +10 mM imidazole. Protein was concentrated using an Amicon ultra 3 kD MWCO device to less than 2 mL and run over an Superdex 75 SEC column equilibrated with column buffer +1 mM DTT. Protein was concentrated using an Amicon ultra 3 kD MWCO device, glycerol added to 5%, aliquoted, snap-frozen, and stored at 80 C. TBCB was expressed in Hi-5 cells adapted to ESF media by infection with 15 mL of P2 virus into 1 L of cells at 2 x 10 cells/ml. Cells were harvested 3 days after infection. Cells were lysed in column buffer (300 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) with Benzonase, fresh PMSF, 20 mM imidazole and Complete protease inhibitors, EDTA free. Cell pellet was resuspended in 90 mL lysis buffer and lysed using dounce homogenization. Lysate was cleared at 40,000 x g for 45 min. Protein was afﬁnity puriﬁed in a 25 mL Ni column equil- ibrated with column buffer and eluted with column buffer +400 mM imidazole after washes of 75 mL column buffer +15 mM imid- azole, 50 mL column buffer +500 mM NaCl +15 mM imidazole, 50 mL column buffer +15 mM imidazole. Protein was concentrated using an Amicon ultra 3 kD MWCO to less than 2 mL and run over an Superdex 200 SEC column equilibrated with 200 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1 mM TCEP. Protein was concentrated using an Amicon ultra 3 kD MWCO device, glycerol added to 5%, aliquoted, snap-frozen, and stored at 80 C. Prefoldin samples were diluted to 5 M. For native gels 7.5 L of sample was run out on 4-16% Native-PAGE gels. For SDS-PAGE, 8 L of 4XPSB (200 mM Tris pH 6.8, 8% SDS, 40% glycerol, 20% -mercaptoethanol, bromophenol blue to color) was added to 24 L of sample, and 10 L of each sample was separated in 15% SDS-PAGE gels. Both gels were run in duplicate with one used for Coo- massie staining and the other for immunoblot. TRiC samples were diluted to 0.5 g/ L and bovine Tubulin to 0.05 g/ L for each Tubulin. For native gels, 5 L of TRiC samples was separated. SDS-PAGE samples were made by adding 4XPSB to 1X ﬁnal concentration, 6 L of TRiC samples and 1, 2, 4 and 8 L of Tubulin were separated. -tubulin folding assay was performed in folding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl and 0.2 mM CaCl ) with fresh TCEP added to 1 mM. Prefoldin: -tubulin was prepared to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 M, TRiC to 0.1 M, and TBCA to 1 M. Samples were incubated in the presence/absence of 0.9 mM ATP, 1 mM GTP as indicated for 1 h. Folding assay samples were sepa- rated by native PAGE and -tubulin was detected by immunoblot with a monoclonal mouse antibody (Proteintech 66,240-1-lg). -tubulin folding was performed in folding buffer with an additional 50 mM KCl and fresh TCEP added to 1 mM. Prefoldin: -tubulin was prepared to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 M, TRiC to 0.25 M, and TBCB to 1 M. Samples were incubated in the presence/absence of 0.9 mM ATP, 1 mM GTP as indicated for 1 h at 37C. Folding assay samples were separated by native PAGE and -tubulin was detected by immunoblot with a monoclonal mouse antibody (Sigma-Aldrich T5168). Prefoldin:tubulin, Bovine tubulin, TRiC, and mmCPN were brought to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 M in 1XATPase buffer (50 mM HEPES, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl , 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT). Samples were brought to 37 C and 1 mM ATP/GTP was added to the Tubulin dimer control, Prefoldin:tubulin sample, TRiC:Prefoldin:tubulin sample (+ATP/GTP), and TRiC:Prefoldin:tubulin sample (+ATP/GTP-AlFx). After 5 min, NaF to 1 mM, and AlNO to 6 mM was added to the TRiC:Prefoldin:tubulin sample (+ATP/GTP- AlFx). After 30 min, samples were brought to room temperature. 15 L was removed from each sample for zero-minute time points, and digestion was initiated by addition of proteinase K to a ﬁnal concentration of 2 ng/ L. Timepoints were taken at 2, 4, 8 and 16 min by adding 15 L sample to 2 L of PMSF, followed by 6 L 4XPSB. Samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. For assays with denatured Tubulin, chaperones were diluted to 0.25 M. Bovine Tubulin at a concentration of 12.5 M was denatured in 6 M GuHCl, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT, and chaperone mixes were used to dilute denatured Tubulin 1:100 for a ﬁnal concentration of 0.125 M. Aggregated Tubulin was pelleted by centrifugation at 21 K*G for 10 min. Super- natant was removed and PK assay was carried out as described as above with 14 L timepoints. Tubulin binding by chaperones was assayed by running 10 L samples in Native PAGE. For western blots, -tubulin was probed for with a monoclonal mouse antibody toward the N-terminus (Proteintech 66,240-1-lg), a polyclonal rabbit antibody (abcam ab6046) or a C-terminal epitope speciﬁc AA2 antibody (Millipore sigma 05-661), and -tubulin with a mouse monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich T5168). For hPrefoldin: -tubulin with hTRiC samples, TRiC was brought to 1 M, and Prefoldin to 2 M, hPrefoldin: / -tubulin alone was pre- pared at 5 M, hTRiC: -tubulin alone was prepared at 1 M. All samples were prepared in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl and 1 mM DTT. TRiC samples were incubated at 37 C for 30 min with nucleotide to reach equilibrium/closed state. Fresh DSS crosslinker dissolved in DMSO was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mM, TRiC samples were incubated at 37 C for 1 h with crosslinker, hPrefoldin: / -tubulin alone was incubated at room temperature for 1 h at room temperature. Crosslinking was quenched by incu- bation for 30 min after addition of 1 M Tris pH 7.4 to a ﬁnal concentration of 100 mM. Crosslinked samples processing steps included reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and iodoacetamide, respectively, sequential diges- tion with endoprotease Lys-C (Wako) and trypsin (Promega), clean-up using solid-phase extraction (Waters Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges) and fractionation of the puriﬁed digests by size exclusion chromatography (SEC; GE Superdex Peptide PC 3. / 00). Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chro- matography on an Acclaim PepMap RLSC C18 column (250 mm 75 m, ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) at a ﬂow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase gradient was 11–40% B in 60 min, with mobile phases A = water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98:2:0.15, v/v/v) and B = acetonitrile/water/formic acid (80:20:0.15, v/v/v). MS/MS data were acquired in the data-dependent acquisition top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s. Precursor and fragment ion spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 and 30,000 resolution, respectively. Precursor ions with a charge state of +3 to +7 were fragmented in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s after one sequencing event. MS/MS spectra were analyzed using xQuest, version 2.1.5 (available from https://gitlab.ethz.ch/leitner_lab/xquest_xprophet ). The database contained the entries of all human TRiC and prefoldin subunits, human tubulin beta (TBB5_HUMAN), and insect tubulins as possible contaminants. No other contaminant proteins were observed at relevant levels. Search parameters for xQuest included: enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, carbamidomethylation of Cys as ﬁxed modiﬁcation, oxidation of Met as variable modiﬁcation, Lys and protein N terminus as cross-linking sites, mass error tolerances of 15 ppm at the MS1 level and 20 ppm at the MS2 level. Search results were further ﬁltered with stricter mass tolerances depending on the dataset, and iden- tiﬁcations were required to have an xQuest delta score <0.9, a TIC score >0.1, and a minimum of four bond cleavages overall or three consecutive bond cleavages per peptide. A parallel search against the reversed and shufﬂed sequences of the database entries re- vealed no decoy hits fulﬁlling the search and ﬁlter criteria, suggesting the false discovery rate is close to 0% for the selected score thresholds. XLs are shown in Table S2 . Mapping of XLs was performed using xiVIEW. Prefoldin and Prefoldin: -tubulin were diluted 20-fold from storage buffer into 250 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7.0, before completing buffer exchange using 10 kDa MWCO Amicon centrifugal ﬁlters (Millipore Sigma). Final concentrations were estimated by UV absor- bance to be between 10 and 20 M Prefoldin. Native mass spectra were then recorded within several hours, during which proteins were kept on ice. Samples were injected using borosilicate emitters (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc ES380) into a QExactive Plus EMR orbi- trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). The quadrupole was set to transmit / range 1,000 to 10,000. Resolution was 17,500 at 200 / for a transient time of 64 ms. Injection time was 50 ms and automatic gain control was off. The capillary voltage was 1.2 kV and S-lens RF was 100. Microscans were grouped sequentially in sets of 10. In-source activation was 50 V and activation in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell was 20 V, based on values found to sharpen peaks without discernable com- plex dissociation. Pressure in the HCD cell (nitrogen) was 5e-10 mbar. For transmission of Prefoldin, the injection ﬂatapole was set to 20 V, the inter ﬂatapole lens to 12 V, and the bent ﬂatapole to 6 V; for Prefoldin: -tubulin transmission, these values were respectively 12, 10, and 3 V. Raw data were summed and visualized in XCalibur v4.1.31.9 (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). Initial deconvolution was per- formed using UniDec v3.1.0. Masses were measured manually by minimizing error over different charge state assignments. Each charge state arising from Prefoldin and Prefoldin: -tubulin was assigned to the open or compact conformation based on Gaussian peak envelopes. Raw signal intensities of each peak were recorded from XCalibur, summed within assigned conformations, and used to derive fractional occupancies. Conclusions based on native MS data were cross-validated by computing changes in solvent- accessible surface area for Prefoldin models. 3 L of apo-TRiC sample was vitriﬁed at 2 mg/mL and applied to 200-mesh R1.2/1.3 holey-carbon grids (Quantifoil) coated with Poly- L-lysine and vitriﬁed using Vitrobot Mark IV (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, CMCI in Seoul). 6,084 Movies were collected on a Titan Krios (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) equipped with a Falcon 4 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) detector. The detailed imaging conditions are shown in Table S1 . 0.5 M TRiC sample was mixed with 2 M Prefoldin: -tubulin complex at RT. CryoEM grids (Quantifoil R1.2/1.3 200 Cu) were glow discharged (PELCO easiGlow) for 45 s 0.07% Octyl-beta-glucoside was mixed with the sample prior to vitriﬁcation. Sample was vitri- ﬁed using Vitrobot Mark IV, where 2.7 L sample was applied on the cryoEM grids and blotted for 3 s 11,796 movies were collected on a Titan Krios (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) equipped with the K2 Summit (Gatan) detector. The detailed imaging conditions are shown in Table S1 . 1 M copuriﬁed TRiC: -tubulin sample was incubated with ATP-AlFx for 1 h at 37 C. CryoEM grids (Quantifoil R1.2/1.3 200 Cu) were glow discharged (PELCO easiGlow) for 45 s. Sample was vitriﬁed using a Gatan Leica GP plunger, where 2.7 L sample was applied on the cryoEM grids and blotted from the back for 3–5 s 31,204 movies were collected on Titan Krios (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) equip- ped with the K2 Summit (Gatan) detector. The detailed imaging conditions are shown in Table S1 . All image processing was done in RELION 3.1 and cryoSPARC v3.2. Computing resources were utilized in the S C SLAC na- tional facility and at CMCI at Seoul National University. The detailed processing parameters are summarized in Table S1 . Movies were aligned in 5 x 5 patches in MotionCor2 and CTF parameters were estimated with GCTF. Utilizing template-based autopicking in cryoSPARC v3.2, 2,100,259 particles were initially picked. After 2D classiﬁcation and removing bad particles, 945,248 particles were subjected to 3D heterogeneous reﬁnement using Ab initio model in cryoSPARC. After further 3D classiﬁcation and CTF reﬁnements, non-uniform reﬁnement was performed using 662,744 particles yielding a 3.11 A map of apo-TRiC based on the gold- standard Fourier shell correlation (FSC) at 0.143. This analysis workﬂow is illustrated in Figure S3 . Movies were aligned in 5 x 5 patches in MotionCor2, and CTF parameters were estimated with GCTF. After initial template-based picking of 1,621,636 particles, 2D classiﬁcation was performed. After selection, 443,858 particles were used for 3D classiﬁcation yielding 2 major classes, Prefoldin bound TRiC with 194,013 particles and non-bound TRiC with 249,845 particles. Using non-uniform reﬁnement, prefoldin bound and non-bound TRiC was reconstructed at a resolution of 3.9 A and 4.2 A , respectively. This analysis workﬂow is illustrated in Figure S3 . 21,486 movies were aligned in 5 x 5 patches by MotionCor2 (v), and CTF parameters were estimated with CTFFIND (v 4.1). Particles picked with a template matching method were subject to multiple rounds of 2D classiﬁcation followed by 3D classiﬁcation. 819,553 particles in open state were used to reconstruct an open state TRIC: -tubulin map to 3.8 A , and 529,181 particles were used to obtain a 2.7 A C1 symmetry map. This analysis workﬂow is illustrated in Figure S4 A. 529,181 particles of closed state are aligned to the C2 (D1) symmetry axis to obtain a 2.5 A consensus map of closed state TRIC- tubulin. For compositional analysis of tubulin in the TRiC chamber, the star ﬁle of the related particles was extended 2 times by relion_particle_symmetry_expand with D1 symmetry to cover the orientation for each of two rings in each particle. 3D focused clas- siﬁcation of the tubulins was performed with a tubulin mask but without symmetry and orientational search. The identiﬁed tubulin occupied rings were thus traced back to the original double-ring TRiC particles for the tubulin occupancy analysis. This analysis workﬂow is illustrated in Figure S4 A. The tubulin occupied rings were further subject to focused classiﬁcation for conformational heterogeneity analysis. In brief, a tubulin mask was applied to the related rings in multiple 3D classiﬁcations without orientational search, four tubulin intermediate conforma- tions were identiﬁed and each conformation was further locally reﬁned to high resolution. This analysis workﬂow is illustrated in Figure S4 B. Model building started from previous Prefoldin:TRiC model (PDB: 6NR8). The initial model was ﬁtted into the density map and manually reﬁned in COOT. Then, the model was reﬁned on the Namdinator server using MDFF and Phenix real space reﬁnement default options. After few rounds, the model was further corrected using Phenix and COOT. The model of TRiC in the closed form (PDB: 7LUM) reference was rigidly ﬁt into the closed state TRiC density by rigid body ﬁtting with Fit in Map tool from Chimera v1.14. This ﬁtted model was further reﬁned with phenix.real_space_reﬁne in Phenix v1.18.1, ISOLDE v1.1.0. And reﬁned models were inspected and adjusted in COOT. The model of tubulin (PDB: 6I2I) was rigidly ﬁtted to each tubulin intermediate density, and manually adjusted by COOT and ISOLDE v1.1.0. All adjusted models were then reﬁned using phenix.real_space_reﬁne in Phenix. All models were validated by Q-score and phenix.validation_cryoem. Difference maps showing the nucleotide density in TRiC- tubulin closed state were calculated between the complex density map and the map calculated from the model of protein only, gener- ated by phenix.real_diff_map. The ﬁgures of the difference map were generated by Chimera with the same contour level 3 sigma. All other ﬁgures were generated by Chimera and ChimeraX. The interactions between TRiC and -tubulin model in each state were calculated using the PISA server ( https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ pdbe/pisa/ ). Residue conservation was compared across 393 mainly eukaryotic with some archaeal species (group II chaperonins) for residues predicted to make interactions by PISA. Plots were generated using plot. Multiple sequence alignments for tubulin and tubulin homologues ( Data S1 ) were generated using the multiple sequence alignment tool T-coffee Espresso and visualized. A phylogenetic tree of tubulin and tubulin homologs was made in MEGA X software. Statistical tests were carried out in Prism. Pie, bar charts, heat maps and scatterplots were produced using R and Prism. Gel and radiograph densitometry were done in ImageJ. ATPase data was plotted in Prism. Average XL distance for PFD-TRiC interXLs was calculated by mapping all interXLs in which both XL residues are resolved onto PDB: 6NR8 and averaging the distance. SEM was calculated by dividing the SD by the square root of the number of XLs. (Cell , 4770–4787.e1–e8; December 8, 2022) We overlooked a related study that was published during the revision of the manuscript. This study visualized tubulin within immu- noprecipitated TRiC complexes using cryo-EM and found partial tubulin density within the TRiC chamber similar to what we observe in Figure 4A (Kelly et al, 2022). We have now acknowledged this study in the Discussion and have cited it accordingly. We apologize for any confusion this error may have caused. 